Every team's most agonizing NFL draft pick in last 20 years
Jim Reineking, USA TODAY Sports Published 1:20 p.m. ET April 25, 2018 | Updated 4:06 p.m. ET April 25, 2018

An unnamed offensive coordinator recently said that when Lamar Jackson 'throws, he hopes'. The NFL draft prospect had a confident response to those remarks. USA TODAY Sports

NFL: New York Jets at Buffalo Bills
(Photo: Kevin Hoffman, USA TODAY Sports)

CONNECT
TWEET
LINKEDIN
 2
COMMENT
EMAIL
MORE
The NFL draft is an event filled with eternal optimism. That is, unless you're a New York Jets fan.

Each year, future pro football stars are selected by NFL teams with the promise of years of gridiron glory. However, sometimes that optimism quickly fades, and a once-promising NFL career is reduced to disappointment. 

Here are the best examples of big-time promise gone bad or circumstance working to wreck draft-day hopes.

AFC EAST
Buffalo Bills

EJ Manuel (2013 draft, Round 1, No. 16 overall) — The 2013 quarterback draft class is among the worst in NFL history. Manuel was the first passer taken that year. He went on to start 10 games for the Bills in his rookie season, and then just seven more over the next three seasons. 

Miami Dolphins

John Avery (1998 draft, Round 1, No. 29 overall) — Over the course of a decade, the Dolphins tried desperately to pair a talented running back with their future Hall of Fame quarterback, Dan Marino. In those 10 years, the Dolphins burned two first-rounders (Avery in '98 and Sammie Smith in '89) and three third-rounders (Aaron Craver in '91, Terry Kirby in '93 and Karim Abdul-Jabbar in '96). Avery was the least productive of the bunch, rushing for just 503 yards in 17 career games with Miami.

New England Patriots

Ras-I Dowling (2011, Round 2, No. 33 overall) — It's not easy to pick an "agonizing" draft pick for a team that's played in eight Super Bowls and has been the dominant team over the past 20 years. But, Dowling was picked with the first selection in the second round and wound up playing in just nine games for the Patriots.

New York Jets

Vernon Gholston (2008 draft, Round 1, No. 6 overall) — Rather than emerging as a disrupting force against opposing offenses, Gholston started just five games over three seasons and registered zero sacks.


AFC NORTH
Baltimore Ravens

Sergio Kindle (2010 draft, Round 2, No. 43 overall) — Kindle was the Ravens' first draft pick in 2010 after the team dealt its first-round selection to the Denver Broncos, who nabbed Tim Tebow. Kindle was picked one selection after Rob Gronkowski. Three months after the 2010 draft, Kindle fell down two flights of stairs, fractured his skull and missed his rookie season. From 2011-12, Kindle appeared in just three games and recorded one career tackle. 

Cincinnati Bengals

Akili Smith (1999 draft, Round 1, No. 3 overall) — This is one of the more fascinating "what-if" scenarios in NFL draft history. The Saints, desperate to trade up and get Ricky Williams, offered a bounty of draft picks to the Bengals to move into the No. 3 spot. The Bengals declined, and those picks eventually landed in the lap of the Redskins in the biggest trade for draft picks ever. Smith played four seasons for the Bengals, throwing five touchdowns and 13 interceptions in 22 games.

Cleveland Browns

Phil Taylor (2011 draft, Round 1, No. 21 overall) — In the pantheon of Browns draft busts, Taylor doesn't quite register with the likes of Johnny Manziel or Brandon Weeden. However, what the Browns could have had in the 2011 draft and what they ultimately wound up with will make this experience a painful one for Cleveland fans. The Browns went into that year's draft owning the No. 6 overall selection, but they traded it to the Falcons so Atlanta could take Julio Jones. Later, the Browns traded up with the Chiefs in order to draft Taylor, but gave up a third-round selection that turned out to be Justin Houston. Jones is one of the league's best receivers, and Houston is a four-time Pro Bowler.

Pittsburgh Steelers

Limas Sweed (2008 draft, Round 2, No. 53 overall) — Sweed managed just seven receptions for 69 yards (no touchdowns) in two seasons with the Steelers. But don't be too sad for him or the Steelers. Sweed did get a Super Bowl ring after Pittsburgh won Super Bowl XLIII. The Steelers, meanwhile, followed up the miss on Sweed by drafting Mike Wallace in the third round in 2009, and then Emmanuel Sanders (third round) and Antonio Brown (sixth round) in 2010. 

Top 40 NFL draft prospect rankings: Who's best overall in 2018 class?

More: Why possible top QB in draft isn't in our top 40

More: Why Lamar Jackson is most intriguing player in draft

AFC SOUTH
Houston Texans

Travis Johnson (2005 draft, Round 1, No. 16 overall) — Eight spots before Aaron Rodgers was selected by the Packers, the Texans took Johnson, a defensive tackle out of Florida State. While Rodgers' drop makes just about every team that passed on him look bad, the Texans look particularly bad. Johnson had an injury-riddled NFL existence, started 38 games over four years in Houston, and then was traded to the Chargers for a sixth-round pick in 2010.

Indianapolis Colts

Phillip Dorsett (2015 draft, Round 1, No. 29 overall) — Seemingly romanced by Dorsett's speed, the Colts made a surprise selection when the team already had receivers T.Y. Hilton, Andre Johnson and Donte Moncrief on the roster. Dorsett lasted just two seasons in Indianapolis before being traded to the Patriots in exchange for quarterback Jacoby Brissett. 

Jacksonville Jaguars

Justin Blackmon (2012 draft, Round 1, No. 5 overall) — The Jaguars' wretched track record with drafting receivers in the first round produced a number of harrowing selections: R. Jay Soward in 2000, Reggie Williams in 2004, Matt Jones in 2005 and Blackmon in 2012. Off-the-field issues derailed Blackmon's NFL career, and he played just two seasons (2012-13) and 20 games in the NFL.

Tennessee Titans

Jake Locker (2011 draft, Round 1, No. 8 overall) — After Cam Newton was selected with the No. 1 pick in the 2011 draft, a motley collection of passers followed in the first round: Blaine Gabbert to the Jaguars (No. 10), Christian Ponder to the Vikings (No. 12) and Locker to the Titans. Locker played four seasons, and then abruptly retired as he was on the cusp of free agency.

AFC WEST
Denver Broncos

Jarvis Moss (2007 draft, Round 1, No. 17 overall) — The Broncos moved up four spots in a trade with the Jaguars in order to draft Moss. The Jaguars, meanwhile, used the pick acquired from the Broncos to select Moss' college teammate, Reggie Nelson. Nelson went on to productive NFL career. Moss, however, not so much, starting just one game over four seasons with the Broncos.

Kansas City Chiefs

Jonathan Baldwin (2011 draft, Round 1, No. 26 overall) — Things in Kansas City got off to a rocky start for Baldwin, who broke his hand during a fight with running back Thomas Jones in training camp of his rookie season. Baldwin had just 579 yards and two touchdowns in two seasons with the Chiefs before being traded to the 49ers in 2013.

Los Angeles Chargers

Ryan Leaf (1998 draft, Round 1, No. 2 overall) — Leaf was so bad that he inadvertently set the Chargers up for future success. By 2000, the Chargers were back atop the draft board, owning the No. 1 overall pick, which was dealt to Atlanta in one of the most significant trades in draft history.

Oakland Raiders

JaMarcus Russell (2007 draft, Round 1, No. 1 overall) — Russell is the frontman for the worst quarterback draft class in NFL history. What makes Russell's selection particularly agonizing for the Raiders is the plethora of great talent that was selected after him in the 2007 draft. Calvin Johnson went No. 2, Joe Thomas No. 3, Adrian Peterson No. 7, Marshawn Lynch No. 12 and Darrelle Revis No. 14. 

Facebook
Twitter
Google+
LinkedIn
Ranking the biggest NFL draft busts of all time
 Fullscreen
1. JaMarcus Russell, QB, Raiders (No. 1, 2007): Oakland paid $39 million for seven wins, 18 TD passes and 300 pounds of "passer." Worse, Russell came at the cost of picking Hall of Fame-caliber talents Calvin Johnson, Joe Thomas, Adrian Peterson, Patrick Willis and Darrelle Revis.  Ezra Shaw, Getty Images
NFC EAST
Dallas Cowboys

Bobby Carpenter (2006 draft, Round 1, No. 18 overall) — Carpenter was one of two Ohio State linebackers to go in the first round that year. The other was A.J. Hawk, who was taken at No. 5 overall and enjoyed a much more productive career with the Packers. Carpenter started just three games in four years with the Cowboys and was mainly used on special teams.

New York Giants

Eli Apple (2016 draft, Round 1, No. 10 overall) — In two seasons, Apple has just one interception to his statistical ledger. However, it's off the field where he has had a tumultuous existence in New York. A teammate called Apple a "cancer" in the Giants' locker room and he was suspended for the Giants' 2017 finale for what was called "a pattern of behavior that is conduct detrimental to the team."

Philadelphia Eagles

Danny Watkins (2011 draft, Round 1, No. 23 overall) — The Eagles' 2011 draft class was brutal. The best selection —center Jason Kelce — wasn't taken until the sixth round. Watkins, a guard out of Baylor, was supposed to be a bedrock on the team's offensive line. Instead, he started 18 games over two seasons with the Eagles.

Washington Redskins

Jason Campbell (2005 draft, Round 1, No. 25 overall) — This wasn't a bad pick, per se, but considering who was drafted right ahead of Campbell, this certainly qualifies as "agonizing." Had the Packers not selected Aaron Rodgers at No. 24 overall in 2005, would the Redskins have chosen Rodgers — the quarterback many pegged to be the best in this draft, despite the 49ers taking Alex Smith at No. 1 — over Campbell? 

NFC NORTH
Chicago Bears

Cade McNown (1999 draft, Round 1, No. 12 overall) — Hopes that McNown would finally be that elusive franchise quarterback in Chicago crashed and burned in a short, tumultuous tenure. McNown alienated teammates (he suggested he overthrew receivers because they were too tired to run under the football) and Bears fans (saying that they should "save all their boos for TV"). By 2001, he was unceremoniously dealt to the Dolphins, for whom he never played.

Detroit Lions

Charles Rogers (2003 draft, Round 1, No. 2 overall) — Over the course of five years, the Lions used their top draft pick on a wide receiver four times. This mess finally ended with Calvin Johnson's selection in 2007, but it started with Rogers, whose career was a colossal disappointment. Making matters worse for the Lions, Andre Johnson was picked by the Houston Texans at No. 3 in 2003.

Green Bay Packers

Antuan Edwards (1999 draft, Round 1, No. 25 overall) — In response to the dominant rookie season of Randy Moss — who played for the division-rival Vikings — the Packers burned their first three draft picks in 1999 on defensive backs. They took Edwards in the first, Fred Vinson in the second and Mike McKenzie in the third round. Only one of those players panned out for the Packers. McKenzie lasted six seasons with the Packers, while Edwards was gone after four seasons and Vinson after one.

Minnesota Vikings

Troy Williamson (2005 draft, Round 1, No. 7 overall) — In March of 2005, the Vikings traded Randy Moss to the Raiders and immediately needed a downfield vertical threat for their passing game. Enticed by Williamson's speed, the Vikings hoped he'd be another dynamic deep threat. Instead, Williamson had a bad case of the dropsies and played just three seasons in Minnesota.

More: Five best NFL draft quarterback classes

More: Five worst NFL draft quarterback classes

Mock draft: Predicting earliest QB dominoes

NFC SOUTH
Atlanta Falcons

Jamaal Anderson (2007 draft, Round 1, No. 8 overall) — Anderson's production (7 1/2 sacks in six seasons) looks especially bad when you consider the talent picked after him (Patrick Willis, Marshawn Lynch, Darrelle Revis, Michael Griffin, Reggie Nelson, Jon Beason). 

Carolina Panthers

Jimmy Clausen (2010 draft, Round 2, No. 48 overall) — Dubbed "The Kid with the Golden Arm" while still in high school, expectations were sky high for Clausen when he went to Notre Dame as the most hyped recruit for the Fighting Irish since the man who was going to win the Heisman Trophy at least twice, Ron Powlus. Clausen's college career wasn't quite as epic as was expected (though he did end Notre Dame's nine-game bowl losing streak with a Hawaii Bowl win over Hawaii), but he was still expected to be a first-round pick. Instead, he fell to the second round. Rather than be a second-round bargain, Clausen struggled, throwing three touchdowns and nine interceptions over 10 starts in his rookie year, in which the Panthers finished 2-14. In the 2011 draft, the Panthers picked Cam Newton with the No. 1 overall pick, and Clausen's time as a starter was over.

New Orleans Saints

Johnathan Sullivan (2003 draft, Round 1, No. 6 overall) — Sullivan, a defensive tackle out of Georgia, lasted just three seasons in New Orleans, appearing in 36 games and registering 1 1/2 sacks. 

Tampa Bay Buccaneers

Dexter Jackson (2008 draft, Round 2, No. 58 overall) — A member of the Appalachian State team that pulled off the shocking upset of Michigan, Jackson — a wide receiver — didn't quite enjoy that same kind of magic in the NFL. He played in just seven games, mostly on special teams returning punts and kickoffs. 

NFC WEST
Arizona Cardinals

Andre Wadsworth (1998 draft, Round 1, No. 3 overall) — Wadsworth was selected after Peyton Manning and Ryan Leaf went 1-2. Charles Woodson was selected by the Raiders one pick after Wadsworth, giving the 1998 draft a Hall of Famer-bust-bust-Hall of Famer sandwich. The Cardinals acquired the No. 3 pick from the Chargers in exchange for the No. 2 pick that allowed San Diego to get Leaf. Arizona, meanwhile, received Pro Bowl return specialist Eric Metcalf, and additional draft picks that eventually netted the team Corey Chavous and David Boston. While that's a good haul, Wadsworth's three sacks over eight seasons is not the sort of production expected from a No. 3 overall pick and might help explain why the Cardinals earned top-10 draft spots in seven of eight years from 2000-2007.

Los Angeles Rams

Greg Robinson (2014 draft, Round 1, No. 2 overall) — The 2012 trade with the Redskins — so they could draft Robert Griffin III — netted the Rams two selections in the top 13 of the 2014 draft. The Rams absolutely nailed their No. 13 overall pick, taking Aaron Donald. The No. 2 overall selection, however, was a bust. Robinson — who lasted just three seasons with the Rams — was picked ahead of perennial Pro Bowlers such as Khalil Mack (No. 5), Anthony Barr (No. 9) and Odell Beckham (No. 12), who was the subject of trade rumors to the Rams this offseason. 

San Francisco 49ers

A.J. Jenkins (2012 draft, Round 1, No. 30 overall) — The stat line of Jenkins — a wide receiver who was healthy his entire rookie year with the 49ers — is the stuff of legend: 0 receptions, 0 yards and just one target. 

Seattle Seahawks

Aaron Curry (2009 draft, Round 1, No. 4 overall) — As the highest-drafted linebacker since the Redskins took LaVar Arrington at No. 2 overall in 2000, Curry got an eye-popping six-year, $60 million contract ($34 million guaranteed). By 2011, he was beat out at his position by K.J. Wright and traded to the Raiders. 