BEIJING/BRUSSELS (Reuters) - China’s international trade representative held a series of meetings with the ambassadors from major European nations last week to ask them to stand together with Beijing against U.S. protectionism, according to four sources familiar with the discussions. 

Some of the western diplomats involved in the meetings with Fu Ziying, who is also a vice-commerce minister, have viewed the approaches as a sign of how anxious Beijing is getting about the expanding conflict with Washington, the sources said.

U.S. President Donald Trump has threatened to impose tariffs on $150 billion in Chinese imports to the U.S. to punish China for what U.S. government officials regard as its predatory industrial policies and abuse of U.S. intellectual property. Beijing has vowed to retaliate.

Amid the rapidly rising tensions between the two sides, China has sought to seize the moral high ground as a defender of the multilateral trade system, even as U.S. allies express shared concern with Washington over Beijing’s highly restricted market.

The rush of meetings last Thursday and Friday with ambassadors from France, Germany, the United Kingdom, Spain, Italy, and the European Union, may be a signal that China is trying to build a firewall against Trump’s aggressive trade measures, the severity of which some foreign diplomats said Beijing had miscalculated.

The individual meetings, which were called by Fu, were generally “non-confrontational” as China sought support in countering the United States, a European diplomat with knowledge of the discussions told Reuters. There were, though, some “subliminal threats” about consequences for foreign companies, this person said.

“The message was that we have to stand together against U.S. protectionism in favor of free trade,” the diplomat said.

“China is showing confidence, but internally they appear quite concerned. They have apparently underestimated Trump’s resolve on trade,” the diplomat said, adding that Beijing is nervous about China’s major trading partners siding with Washington.

Three other diplomatic sources, and three embassies, confirmed that the meetings occurred.

An Italian embassy spokeswoman said its ambassador met with Fu on April 12, and that while the U.S.-China trade dispute was discussed, the meeting was mostly about bilateral issues.

A British embassy spokeswoman also confirmed that its ambassador met with Fu last week as part of regular discussions with the ministry that touched on “bilateral and multilateral trade issues”.

An EU Delegation spokesman said its ambassador attended a meeting with Fu, but did not elaborate.

A German embassy spokesman declined to comment, and the other embassies did not respond immediately to requests for comment.

China’s Commerce Ministry also did not respond to a request for comment.
“SMACKS OF DESPERATION”

The Chinese government’s top diplomat Wang Yi, during a visit to Tokyo on Monday, urged Japan to work together with China to oppose protectionism, though foreign officials say that China is not naive enough to think that it could fully drive a wedge between Washington and its allies.

One senior EU diplomat in Brussels who confirmed the meetings said the EU was not in the business of taking sides, and that its goal was to get the multilateral process back on track, referring to efforts to resolve trade disputes through the WTO.

“I think it also smacks of desperation because China also knows that the European Union is not going to confront its biggest ally,” the EU diplomat said of the meetings.

“China has been very effective at making the most of the free-trading rule book. I don’t think anyone in the West is going to leave it to China to set new ones,” the Brussels-based diplomat said.

Trade policy for members of the EU is handled by the European Commission, not by individual member states.

Another western diplomat in Beijing, who was speaking on condition of anonymity, said China’s outreach to European countries had begun even before Trump announced 25 percent tariffs on $50 billion in Chinese industrial technology, transport and medical products in early April.

When Beijing responded within hours with its intention to levy similar duties on $50 billion worth of U.S. soybeans, planes, cars, beef and chemicals, Trump then escalated the dispute by instructing his administration to identify another $100 billion worth of Chinese goods to penalize. 

None of these threatened duties have yet gone into effect.

U.S. business groups argue that Trump should form a coalition with the EU, Japan and other western nations to push China to open its economy. They say that these countries share Washington’s consternation over Chinese market restrictions and its policies to produce national champion companies in key industries at the expense of foreign competitors.

However, instead of reaching out to its European allies, Washington has alienated them with its protectionist moves, including its targeting of European countries with tariffs on steel and aluminum exports to the U.S.

The EU has said the U.S. steel and aluminum tariffs are unjustified and is seeking compensation from the United States at the World Trade Organization. 

WILMINGTON, Del./NEW YORK (Reuters) - Bon-Ton Stores Inc, a bankrupt chain of 200 regional department stores, will go out of business after the only bidders competing at the Monday start of its court-supervised auction were liquidators, two sources familiar with the matter told Reuters.

Bon-Ton had been working with U.S. mall owners Namdar Realty Group and Washington Prime Group Inc (WPG.N) to secure a bid that would have kept open a large portion of Bon-Ton locations. Bon-Ton is a major tenant of both landlords and its survival would have helped protect the value of their malls.

The failure of the company, with headquarters in York, Pennsylvania and Milwaukee, comes weeks after Toys ‘R’ Us began a piecemeal liquidation of its namesake stores and Babies ‘R’ Us, the latest sign of upheaval in the retail industry.

A spokesperson for Bon-Ton did not immediately respond to a request for comment.

As of late Monday, the auction had not concluded, according to four sources.

Money raised from the auction will be used to repay what is owed to Bon-Ton’s creditors.

Once the company selects a winning bidder and the proposed deal is approved by the U.S. Bankruptcy Court in Wilmington, Delaware, the liquidator can begin selling the inventory, store leases, fixtures and intellectual property. 

One liquidator group estimated their initial bid was worth about $650 million, according to a creditor representative.

The company’s stores include Carson’s, Younkers, Elder-Beerman, Bergner’s, Boston Store, and Herberger’s, as well as Bon-Ton.

The company, which traces its roots to 1854, says on its website that it has survived the U.S. Civil War, Great Depression and “profound cultural and technological transformations.”

But many storied retailers have struggled amid the current industry disruption from low-margin discounters such as Walmart Inc (WMT.N) and the increasing popularity of online shopping, dominated by Amazon.com Inc (AMZN.O).

Sports Authority Holdings Inc, apparel chain The Limited Stores LLC and electronics seller hhgregg Inc are among the chains that have gone out of business recently.

Bon-Ton and Toys ‘R’ Us operated a combined nearly 60 million square feet (5.6 million square meters) of store space, according to their latest annual reports, and employed a combined 83,000 when they entered bankruptcy.

Bon-Ton filed for bankruptcy in February and Toys ‘R’ Us in September. 

BEIJING/SHANGHAI (Reuters) - China will scrap a limit on foreign ownership of automotive ventures by 2022 in a major policy shift to open up the world’s biggest car market, even as trade tensions simmer between Washington and Beijing. 

In a move welcomed by Germany’s powerful car industry, China’s state planner said on Tuesday it would remove foreign ownership caps for companies making fully electric and plug-in hybrid vehicles in 2018, for makers of commercial vehicles in 2020, and the wider car market by 2022.

China imposed ownership restrictions in 1994, limiting foreign carmakers to owning no more than a 50 percent share of any local venture. Forcing foreign carmakers to work with Chinese firms was designed to help domestic carmakers compete.

The latest policy move marks a new twist in a see-saw week for Chinese trade. The country slapped a temporary fee on U.S. sorghum on Tuesday after the United States banned American companies from selling parts to Chinese phone maker ZTE Corp (0763.HK) (000063.SZ) on Monday.

Germany’s BMW (BMWG.DE), which has a big stake in trade relations between Beijing and Washington as the biggest exporter of vehicles from the United States to China, welcomed the decision. 

“We believe a more free and flexible business environment will benefit both Chinese and foreign companies in China and the Chinese economy. BMW will continue pursuing mutual benefit and win-win solutions with the local partners,” the carmaker said.

BMW added it remained committed to expanding a joint venture with China’s BBA and was still discussing how to structure a new partnership for its Mini brand with China’s Great Wall Motors.

Analysts said the main beneficiaries, at least in the short term, would be manufacturers focused on new-energy vehicles, including U.S. electric carmaker Tesla (TSLA.O), which has been seeking to set up its own plant in Shanghai.

Tesla chief Elon Musk said last month that China’s tough auto rules for foreign businesses created an uneven playing field as scores of local and international companies compete for a slice of China’s fast-growing market for “green” cars.

Tesla was not immediately available to comment on Tuesday.

The looser rules are likely to raise pressure on domestic carmakers, potentially hitting the likes of Warren Buffett-backed BYD Co (002594.SZ).

Traditional automakers will need to wait longer for any direct impact and could face more risks than opportunities in ditching their joint venture structures, said James Chao, Asia-Pacific chief at consultancy IHS Markit.

“Foreign companies may already be in a box (in China),” said Chao, adding the joint venture structure was now so ingrained that many might not want to change it.

“While getting a bigger share could be advantageous in terms of boosting profits, they may actually be already too dependent on their Chinese partners to sever those ties.”

A spokesman for Germany’s Volkswagen (VOWG_p.DE) said: “We will carefully analyze whether this opens up new opportunities for Volkswagen and its brands.”

Daimler (DAIGn.DE), parent company of Mercedes-Benz, said it was happy with its current business set-up in China, adding it was watching regulatory developments with interest.
JOINT VENTURES

A senior General Motors (GM) executive said last week the U.S. carmaker, even without ownership caps, would not cut ties with local partner SAIC Motor Corp (600104.SS). The source, who asked to remain anonymous because of the sensitivity of the matter, added GM would not be as successful in China on its own. 

GM (GM.N) also said last week its growth in China was “a result of working with our trusted joint venture partners”.

Japan’s Nissan Motor Co (7201.T) said in a statement it would “monitor how any specific policies develop and will plan accordingly”.

Honda Motor Co (7267.T) said its China business had grown on the back of strong local tie-ups. “At the moment we have no plans to change our capital relationship,” a spokesman said.

China will also scrap limits on foreign ownership in the shipbuilding and aircraft industries in 2018, the National Development and Reform Commission (NDRC) said.

Airbus (AIR.PA) and Boeing (BA.N) did not immediately respond to Reuters’ requests for comment.

The highly symbolic moves in autos come after President Xi Jinping said last week China would scrap ownership limits “as soon as possible”, exciting global auto brands even as Beijing and Washington spar over trade tariffs.

China, which said the easing of autos rules was unrelated to that dispute, is keen to portray itself as open for business. Its ties with the world’s largest economy, though, are becoming increasingly fraught.

The United States has banned American companies from selling parts to telecoms equipment maker ZTE Corp for seven years, creating a new fissure in Sino-U.S. ties. 