Investing in the stock market
Quick answer: The basic idea behind investing in the stock market is to put money you’ve saved into stocks you think will increase in value over time.
There is no guarantee that you will make money in stocks. Making your investments pay off takes a lot of work. You need to follow the financial news, use the market indices such as the Dow Jones Industrial Average , S&P 500, and the NASDAQ Composite to watch market trends, and thoroughly research companies you want to invest in.
Ways to invest in the stock market
There are many ways to invest in the stock market. A few common ways are listed below.
Instructions: Click each way to invest to learn more about it.
Buying shares in a company
When you invest in stocks, you’re investing in businesses. These could be small, medium, or large companies in the U.S. or around the world. Buying stock gives you part ownership in a company. That’s why you should only buy stocks in companies you believe in — and believe can do well. Each stock carries its own specific risks.
Mutual funds
Exchange-Traded Funds (ETFs)
Risks and rewards
Money that is invested in the stock market can have a great potential for growth but stocks can be risky because their value can change from day to day. There are no guarantees of a profit.
Research before you invest
* Research is critical to investing success.
* Research before investing. Most brokerages offer research and financial news in addition to stock quotes.
* Base your decisions to invest on facts, not emotions.
* Be as objective as you can about the risks and potential rewards.
* View “stock advice” about investments with skepticism. Do your research.
Trump Picks Monetary Expert for No. 2 Job at Federal Reserve
By JIM TANKERSLEYAPRIL 16, 2018
Continue reading the main storyShare This Page
* Share
* Tweet
* Email
* More
* Save
Photo

Richard Clarida, a former Treasury official and a monetary expert, is President Trump’s nominee for the No. 2 post at the Federal Reserve. CreditReuters
WASHINGTON — President Trump will nominate Richard Clarida, a Columbia University economist and former Treasury official in the George W. Bush administration, for the second-ranking job at the Federal Reserve, the White House said on Monday.
Mr. Clarida is a monetary policy scholar whose expertise would complement the background of the Fed chairman, Jerome H. Powell, who is not an academically trained economist. His nomination was widely expected. If confirmed by the Senate, he would join Mr. Powell and John C. Williams, the incoming president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, in the leadership troika for America’s central bank.
The White House also said on Monday that Mr. Trump would nominate Michelle Bowman, the Kansas bank commissioner, for a seat on the Fed board that represents community banks. Ms. Bowman is a former vice president at Farmers & Drovers Bank in Council Grove, Kan.
Mr. Clarida served as assistant Treasury secretary for economic policy from 2002 to 2003. For more than a decade, he has been a global strategic adviser for the investment giant Pimco. His academic work includes research papers on exchange rates, inflation and optimal monetary policy.
Continue reading the main story

ADVERTISEMENT
Continue reading the main story
His nomination won quick applause from Fed watchers and some economists, who cast him as a serious thinker who is unlikely to pull the central bank radically away from its gradual approach to raising interest rates as the economy continues to heal from the financial crisis.
Newsletter Sign Up
Continue reading the main story
Sign up for the all-new DealBook newsletter
Our columnist Andrew Ross Sorkin and his Times colleagues help you make sense of major business and policy headlines — and the power-brokers who shape them.
Top of Form
Sign Up
You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services.
Bottom of Form
 “Rich Clarida is an outstanding monetary economist whose knowledge of monetary policy and international finance will add greatly to the Fed in this most interesting time,” said R. Glenn Hubbard, the dean of Columbia’s business school and a former chairman of Mr. Bush’s Council of Economic Advisers. “In addition, Rich’s knowledge of and experience in financial markets will make him a valuable colleague for Chairman Powell.”
Tim Duy, a University of Oregon economist who writes the Fed Watch blog, said Mr. Clarida was “a solid pick — a respected academic economist plus market experience via Pimco plus government experience.”
“I don’t think every position needs to be filled by a trained macroeconomist, but given the nature of the job, I think there needs to be a heavy dominance of trained macroeconomists,” Mr. Duy said. “I think he fits within the current consensus as well so, like the elevation of Williams, represents largely a maintenance of the status quo, at least for now.”
Ms. Bowman is also a veteran of the George W. Bush administration, where she worked for the Federal Emergency Management Agency and the Department of Homeland Security. Before returning to her native Kansas in 2010, she led a government and public affairs consulting company in London.

