German politics has become much more complicated
The old party system is fragmenting
A STUDY OF attitudes towards immigration in Germany, published in July last year by More in Common, a campaigning organisation, identified five distinct groups of broadly similar size: liberal cosmopolitans (all in favour), humanitarian sceptics (for an open-border policy, but concerned about integration), economic pragmatists (supporting it when it pays), moderate opponents (advocating full repatriation in due course) and radical opponents (strongly against). The report points to the increasing fragmentation of the German electorate, and to a shift from economic debates to cultural ones.
The election sent a record seven parties to the federal parliament (see chart), up from five last time round and four for much of the post-war era. The share of the three big Volksparteien (people’s parties), the CDU/CSU and the SPD, fell from 67% to 53% of the vote. Smaller parties did well, with big gains for the far-right AfD, which came second in the formerly communist east and first in one of its states, Saxony. There were gains, too, for the pro-market Free Democrats (FDP) and for the liberal-environmentalist Greens. Their rival on the left, the socialist Left party, slightly increased its share of the vote as well.
Immediately after the election the SPD made it clear that it wanted to go back into opposition to renew itself after four years as part of a grand coalition. The CDU opened talks with the only other possible coalition partners that would be able to deliver a majority: the FDP and the Greens. But Green lefty openness proved too difficult to reconcile with FDP pro-business conservatism, so after much arm-twisting the SPD was persuaded to reconsider in January and eventually agreed to enter another grand coalition. The alternative would have been a minority government, which Mrs Merkel had said she did not want, or a fresh election, for which the SPD’s miserable poll results did not augur well. In early March the SPD’s members approved the deal with a two-thirds majority.

The AfD is now the largest opposition party in the Bundestag, which strengthens its calls for a closed Germany"
That was a huge relief for the CDU/CSU. It had felt obliged to offer the SPD a generous number of ministerial posts as sweeteners, including the mighty finance ministry, now held by Olaf Scholz, a fiscally conservative former mayor of Hamburg. The coalition deal also offers more child care, tax cuts for middle and lower earners, increased infrastructure investment and strict new limits on the use of short-term work contracts. The CDU/CSU got agreement that refugee arrivals will be capped at 180,000-220,000 a year and family reunification will be limited to 1,000 a month plus “hardship cases”. But there is little sign of a wider vision for Germany and its place in the world.

The AfD is now the largest opposition party in the Bundestag, which strengthens its calls for a closed Germany. The party’s co-leader and parliamentary boss, Alexander Gauland, has said Germans would not want to live next door to Jérôme Boateng, a half-Ghanaian player in Germany’s national football team. The party is part of a wider web of views and organisations that are uncomfortable with the diversity of modern Germany. The anti-Islam movement PEGIDA marches through (mostly eastern) German cities chanting, “we are the people.” “Finis Germania”, a bestselling book by Rolf Peter Sieferle, a historian, claims that the country let in refugees out of self-hate induced by post-war guilt.

At the opposite end of the political spectrum from the AfD are the Greens, the party of cosmopolitans. It is booming in polls and confident under a dynamic new leadership. But the real battle will take place in the muddy ground in between those two poles, occupied by the humanitarian sceptics, the economic pragmatists and the moderate opponents. “The future depends on who wins over the ambivalent,” says Timo Lochocki, a German expert on populism.

An open-versus-closed divide runs though all the major parties. Many on the centre-right are in favour of creating a firmer German Leitkultur (lead culture), revoking dual citizenship and outlawing the burqa. Some deem Islam “not part of Germany”. All of this could blow up when Mrs Merkel steps down, as she is expected to do by the next election, due in 2021. On one side are Merkel loyalists like Annegret Kramp-Karrenbauer, the new general secretary of the CDU; on the other more conservative figures like Jens Spahn, the new health minister and a long-term critic of Mrs Merkel’s refugee policy. The SPD cannot decide whether it has given too much or too little attention to bread-and-butter issues such as pay. The socialist Left party, too, is torn between metropolitan voters, among whom it gained support at the election, and nativist ones, mostly in the east, some of whom deserted it. The pro-business FDP is similarly divided.

There is a template for this: the Netherlands. Like its Dutch counterpart, politics in Germany may soon be dominated by an economically liberal but socially conservative party, a rump social democratic party competing with greens for the main left-of-centre ground, and other, smaller parties offering different combinations of left and right, open and closed. Who wins and who loses ground will be determined mainly by two factors: immigration and national identity.